---
title: "The Conflict Motive and Human Nature"
date: 2016-05-18
categories: 
  - "politics"
  - "writing"
---

_**A unique exercise conducted by my friend and I. Original debate can be found [here.](https://atypicalrationale.wordpress.com/2015/09/19/the-conflict-motive-and-human-nature/)**_

In the following article, we speak of and propose contradictory views on the collective motives behind armed conflicts that have occurred through history. We attempt to explain a society’s mass reasoning behind entering into war with another society and that reasoning’s direct source- human nature. As you will read on, Arnav proposes and backs the perspective that all human armed conflict is based on the idea that humans seek to propagate a core set of ideologies they believe in and seek to destroy any competing ideologies- they fight for what they believe in at the subconscious, very basic instinct level. Rahul proposes and backs the view that all human conflict is based on the desire for acquisition of power or resources-they fight for money.

The perspectives put forth below are not backed by hard research and are solely the opininons of the writers, contrary to most other literature on Atypical Rationale. There is no legitimate way to prove either and the choice between the two is purely subjective- both are equally plausible and the only way you can differentiate between their legitimacy is by your own discretion and beliefs about human nature.

#### Perspective #1

Through this article, I look to hypothesize that the principal cause of all major armed conflict is at its very core, a contrast in belief. While modern armed conflicts may stem from the desire for economic expansion, I argue that it is human diversity that is the reason conflicts break out. The modern constructs of equality and secularism attempt to negate the very obvious differences that are present in our societies and thus try to extract reactions from the general population that goes against human nature. As a society that prides itself on diversity and being an ethno-linguistic melange, we are conveniently ignorant to the fact that these differences are the reason conflicts break out.<!--more--> Xenophobia or the fear of that which is perceived as foreign or strange, is a fundamental human tendency. Fear of the unknown is something that has been inculcated in every fibre of our being – every parent tells their child not to talk to ‘strangers’, religion spoke of not eating in the dark as ‘unknown’ abnormalities may occur, the concept of aliens has always fascinated mankind. It is no doubt that exploring what is not currently in man’s domain of knowledge is a integral part of our development as a species. It is when this exploration collides with another’s exploration where conflict arises. Not just physical collision or overlap, but intellectual or economic confrontation often doesn’t sit well with both parties involved – resulting in conflict. It is recherché to witness a monumental armed conflict amongst parties that have uniform ideologies.

#### PERSPECTIVE #2

Humans by nature of being the most cognitively advanced creature on the planet kindle an unusually intense form of a rather common trait- egocentric selfishness. This selfishness is the reason behind possibly all human behaviours- from uniting for collective and individual benefit into states and countries to the death of the true welfare state and Communism (not socialism). That selfishness boils down to a simple motive that is the driving factor behind all collective decisions- the desire for the acquisition of power, resources, a larger sphere of influence, attention, publicity, profit or all of the above. That statement can be further expanded to say that every single collective state armed conflict between societies since the inception of civilization has been for this reason- for the procurement of power or resources. While most conflicts are carried out under the pretext of another reason, often a more noble cause, the core, base motive is purely selfish. Almost every single armed conflict has been in the name of a cause that is not legitimate- the Crusades wasn’t really fought for God, the American Civil War wasn’t really fought for African-American equality and rights (\*cheeky grin\*), the Wars in Afghanistan and Iraq weren’t really for democracy and freedom. The idea that countries engage in armed conflict for what they believe in is naive- nations don’t risk all and attack other countries because they think differently or they live a different way of life. People don’t by instinct give their life for an abstract concept like God or democracy, unless well coerced into doing so, which is, more often than not, rare. In short, countries go to war when their own economic expansion or their capacity for survival is threatened- not because of a difference in ideologies. In reality, it may appear that these ideologies are the reasons behind wars and genocides but these ideologies stem from nothing other than economic and expansionist roots.

There is a single exception to this perspective- the countless unjustified massacre of European invaders (NOT settlers) of native Americans- the white conquistadors and invaders had no reason to exterminate indigenous populations as there was far more than enough land to rule and amounts of economic resources for co-existence of all. This armed conflict can only be explained by racial cruelty and xenophobia, and not by the desire to acquire more power or resources.

Below are 3 example of armed conflicts that are explained by both perspectives.

### DEBATED EXAMPLES OF ARMED CONFLICT

#### **A. THE CRUSADES**

**Perspective #1**

The very fact that the Crusades are known as a religious war, or a holy war, leaves very little to the mind as to determining its genesis (haha,pun intended. To paraphrase renowned historian Thomas Madden, ‘the crusade, first and foremost, was a war against Muslims for the defence of the Christian faith’. The direct representative of God (according to Christian doctrines), the Pope, sanctioned military operations to seize and regain Jerusalem, the holiest site of all Christians. His intention was not to increase the Christian sphere of influence of economics, that was an inevitable bi-product of his action that stemmed from difference in religion. The leaders of the Christian world believed that the Jewish were infidels, a sanctimonious group of people who brought upon nothing but harm to the Holy Land. If this difference in ideology, in this case religion did not exist, and the Jews were Catholics, it can be said with absolute certainty that the representative of God would not authorise the siege on Jerusalem or any of the other Crusades as there would be no enemy.

 

**Perspective #2**

Contrary to the above perspective, the primary causes behind the Crusades were not in fact religious. Of course, religious and eco-political motives align, but the latter was the more decisive reason. Before the Crusades, Europe had reached economic stagnation and was dangerously high on population and low on per capita consumption, and was also lagging behind technologically, socially and politically. At the time of the Crusades, European nations were in the middle of huge eco-political paradigm shifts, and venting out of pressure couple with the defence of Europe from expanding Turks was necessary. Additionally, it can’t be believed that dukes, bishops and military leaders acted for the same reasons the pope and religious leaders called for. The economic upliftment of Europe via expansion into the Middle East was the real primary motive behind the Crusades. Fore more information, please read [this in-depth article about this perspective and its application to the Crusades](http://ic.galegroup.com/ic/whic/ReferenceDetailsPage/ReferenceDetailsWindow?zid=5ce04720240d6edc41ece33a60c2fc96&action=2&catId=&documentId=GALE%7CCX2877000020&userGroupName=tlc199095657&jsid=4a457e60f27cda06521b9794259c49f7).

#### **B. THE KOREAN WAR**

**Perspective #1**

One of the bloodiest Cold War frontiers, the 38th parallel was and always will be an ideological construct. 1951 saw both nations, the Republic of Korea or South Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or North Korea, attempt to reunify the Korean peninsula under one united government. The initial bifurcation of the peninsula post the Second World War was based on Kim Il-Sung’s desire to adopt a economic system based on Marxist ideals, while the Synghman Rhee government adopted a rightist, capitalist approach. It is safe to assume that if both parties, that is the DPRK and the ROK, were both completely leftist as the DPRK were or completely rightist as the ROK were, this dispute would not arise. While this conflict cannot be attributed to xenophobia per se, it most definitely arose from the difference in ideology. Both nations claimed (and still claim) to be the sole legitimate government over the peninsula and that they also strived toward achieving the well-being of all Koreans, regardless of their political commitments at the time. Since the population of of Korea was homogeneous in terms of ethnicity, the unknown factor does not really come into the picture. Both parties wanted to ensure the well being of the civilians. As civilian strife cannot be a cause for the dispute, it can only boil down to heterogeneous ideologies being applied to homogeneous population. The contrasting belief system that both Koreas propagated led one to push the other over the edge to avenge and regain what they believed was deserved.

 

**Perspective #2**

While, as explained above, it is true that the difference in ideologies was the main factor behind the Cold War and by extension the Korean War, in order to discover and fully understand the causes behind the Korean War, one must first understand the economic reasons behind the Cold War and the necessity of both blocs to destroy the other’s ideology. The economic ideologies of Communism and Capitalism were at the base of the conflict between the blocs. The USA felt threatened by Soviet expansionist aspirations, as communism had the potential of jeopardizing the US’ capitalist economic system and the international climate in which they operated. In turn, this would endanger their individual material well-being. Conversely, the USSR under its own momentum could not allow the consolidation of the US global sphere of influence, while the US worked to weaken theirs’. These opposing beliefs prompted, in both countries, a desire for global ideological dominance, influence and power, and eventually sparked in the form of the Korean War, the Cuban Missile Crisis, the Vietnam War, etc. In conclusion, one could say that the differing ideologies was the root cause behind the Cold War, but the desires for expansion, power and a larger sphere of influence generated those ideologies and their support.

#### **C. THE RWANDAN GENOCIDE**

**Perspective #1**

The genocide of Rwanda in 1994 in context of the Rwandan Civil War prior to it was a mass communal conflict between the Hutus (the majority) and the Tutsi (the minority). It is a widely accepted fact that the genocide was fought along tribal differences- the two communities are culturally and ethnically very distant. The two entities have bee engaged in armed conflict over tribal disputes ever since the first European colonisation efforts were made in the region. It is also hypothesized that the European colonial tyranny extended over the region subjugated the two communities- although utilizing the classic ‘Divide and Rule’ strategy to distant the two and grant privileges to the local leaders- the Tutsis. After the Europeans left, Rwanda was crumbling in their wake and the horrific manifestation of that deterioration of relationships between the Hutus and the Tutsis took form in the Civil War and the genocide following it. The power vacuum created by the Europeans sparked by underlying disparities and deep differences between the communities, drawn from xenophobia and desire for vengeance by the tribal members for acts of other tribes in the past was the legitimate cause for the breaking out of the genocide.

 

**Perspective #2**

It is a common understandable misconception that the genocide in Rwanda occured because of tribal conflict between the Tutsi (the ruling minority) and the Hutu (the peasant majority), and communal hatred that had been brewing over decades. However, this communal angst was but a manifestation of economic inequalites and distree caused by a huge population explosion. An enormous population was crammed into Rwanda, and as a result, per capita land holding was pathetically minuscule. On average, a Rwandan regardless of tribal allegiance owned land the size of a basketball court and relied on it for basic sustenance, which he could not achieve. This awful poverty and overpopulation caused unprecedented levels of hatred between those who had practically nothing and those who had slightly more than practically nothing. This poverty stoked by famine and disease created not only communal disparities but familial and intra-tribal competition which grew out of control. Eventually, this downward-spiralling situation grew to unimaginable conditions and a [Malthusian genocide](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malthusian_catastrophe) was sparked, where millions upon millions were killed. One could even , if one was so inclined, to say that the ensuing fatal violence involving castration, amputation, burning alive and rectal impalement was all neccessary for the stabilisation of per capita land holding and reduction of population. In this case, communal ideological differences had little to no contribution to the motives behind the sparking of Malthusian genocide. For further reading, please refer to Jared Diamond’s ‘Collapse’, chapter 10.
