---
title: "Echoes of Earth 2018"
date: 2019-02-21
categories: 
  - "gig-reviews"
---

In a time when there are music festivals that are spawning across the country at an unprecedented rate, there exists an immense choice for those interested in spending a weekend engaged in unbridled revelry. Festivals, usually earmarked with profuse amounts of intoxicants, music and hedonistic pursuit, are typically an individualistic – almost inconsiderate activity that has little regard for anything adjacent to the weekend it occupies. Least of all, festivals have never been known for their commitment to the environment – neither the social environment and the people who live in the venue's vicinity nor the physical environment – the foliage, fauna and resources that surround the festival.

Echoes of Earth was a departure from the aforementioned insensitivity directed at the environment yet held at its core the entire festival experience – and then some. The festival was hosted at the Embassy Riding School – located about an hour from Bangalore proper. The venue was nestled in an area that Google Maps described as ‘dense mixed forests’. Surrounded by trees of a variety of sizes, that break only for the sprawling stages, the manner in which the festival integrated itself with the immediate environment was impeccable. All parts of the festival were produced in fantastic fashion, however, what was more impressive is that it was not invasive in any way. It was almost as if the stages and stalls were at the venue throughout the year. They blended with the surroundings in both a physical and an intangible manner – making the festival an all-around fabulous experience – not just for the attendees but for everyone involved.

<!--more-->

Echoes of Earth approaches each festival with a theme that broadly revolves around some element of ecological conservation. This year, the theme was centred around marine life and its preservation. This manifested itself in a plethora of ways – the stages, the installations and the décor across the venue were linked to marine life. This was not just effective in spreading awareness regarding the rapidly degrading marine environment but added an aesthetic angle to the festival. It was both engaging and aesthetically pleasing, and provided the audience with enriching reading material as they traversed between the stages or sipped on their beers. The theme also extended to the ‘break' zones sprawled across the venue, with cosy mattresses and hammocks that transport you away from the relentless techno playing a minute's walk away.

The festival had four stages – the main stage named Lionfish, and quite literally designed in the same manner, the Mandala stage that featured an eclectic line-up over the two days, the Anglerfish stage that hosted the vast variety of DJs at the festival and the Big Tree stage, an intimate, blissful setting.

Ape Echoes, the Mumbai based duo comprising one half of Paraphoniks (Sid Shirodkar) and one half of Nothing Anonymous (Nirmit Shah), brought their electronic set live with the help of Sahil Shah on drums and Harshvardhan Gadvi on guitars in stellar fashion. With vocoded vocals drizzled over their jazz-infused arrangements, the set showcased not just enjoyable live electronica but also a high level of dexterity. The additional instruments added to their live set elevated the set, with palm muted guitars following the synths that traversed octaves and scales, adding a layer of depth and texture to the music that proved exceptionally well, especially in their live setting. Both Sid and Nirmit played different synths and different sections that never overlapped but coalesced in incredible fashion.

Azadi Records, the Delhi based label that has shot to prominence over the past year, put together one of their iconic showcases, featuring a few artists from their roster of the subcontinents finest hip-hop artists.

The Showcase presented SIRI, Tienas and Seedhe Maut, accompanied by the evergreen DJ Uri, the man who brought scratching to Indian shores. He traversed beats and grooves in the most exquisite of fashions, while the vocalists came in all guns blazing. SIRI, with her hard-hitting multilingual verses, set the stage alight – getting the crowd enthused by her non-discriminate, uplifting and unifying lyrics. Tienas brought a slightly more mellow approach to his section – melodic yet relentless in its flow. The Showcase verified that Azadi Records are the torchbearers of hip-hop in its truest form – empowering, honest and ruthless. A far cry from the excesses and brouhaha rap is commonly associated with, the set (as is the case with any Azadi Records gig) was raw and filled with passion.

On the Mandala stage, Sid Sriram played an expansive set that exemplified fusion in its most contemporary form. Comprising a host of instruments of a global variety (most notably Sapta's Marti Bharath on electronics), the performance ran high on emotion across its instrumentation and in Sid's voice – a unique vessel that oscillated between Indian classical runs, heartwarming melodies and the occasional interludes sprinkled with spoken word-esque poetry. This wide variety of vocal appendages was complimented perfectly by percussion, guitars and other sonic vehicles that put filled up spaces effortlessly, nestling a warm, nurturing feeling through the set. Sid's first gig in Bangalore and his first festival in India was definitely one to remember, as it pushed the envelope on what fusion music means.

The act I was personally looking forward to more than any other, Tennyson, replicated their organic, textured sound in incredible fashion on the Mandala stage. The Canadian sibling duo married their mellow sensibilities with synth-heavy hooks that had the crowd gleaming through the set. The use of innumerable percussive instruments by Tess was particularly impressive given the wide range of sounds it covered, and Luke's effortless control over pads, synths and other controllers saw him dancing around his control booth, scurrying from instrument to instrument. The relationship that the siblings shared, in their emoting, in their interactions with the crowd and in their dynamic with one another brought out an endearing element to a stellar set.

Between sets, I had the good fortune of visiting the food stalls. As expected, there were a host of eateries serving a range of cuisines and flavours, including Bombay’s favourite Apsara ice-cream. There were, thankfully, healthy options as well, which served as a good break from the typical pizza and French fries that festival goers are so accustomed to. More than the stalls themselves, the seating area near the food court was wooden tables and chairs – creating an atmosphere of camping or picnicking while in the middle of a music festival. Tables were large and long, making it inevitable to talk to the person you were sitting next to, creating friendships and strengthening relationships while enjoying some incredible food!

Next up on the Lionfish stage was Iglooghost. The English producer brought his breakbeat, glitchy brand of electronic music as a single-person act, that saw Seamus Malliagh tinkering with various faders, pads and controllers through the set. The music, as expected, flirted with a multitude of genres, spanning drum and bass, hip-hop and ambient, with long reverberating notes serving as interludes between songs. Iglooghost's set, however, did feel a little bit out of place – most other one-person electronica acts were on the Anglerfish stage. This meant that Iglooghost's set saw fewer footfall – however, this was populated by genuine enthusiasts of this brand of electronic music. The thoroughly impassioned crowd danced through the forty-five-minute set – with movements more visceral than any other I saw at the festival.

Perhaps the performance of the evening – Stavroz – brought their full-blown live set to the Mandala Stage. The Belgian band played an India tour earlier this year, however, this would mark their first festival appearance. Comprising guitars, bass, an entire mixer, and various forms of electronics and synthesisers, Stavroz had the Mandala stage oscillating to their every note. Horns, saxophone and other brass-infused melodies layered on top of almost Arabic sounding basslines with similar Middle Eastern percussion were at the core of Stavroz's set. This was accompanied by lush synths, arpeggiated and reverberated, that gave vigour and dynamism to their constant build-ups and breakdowns, that had the crowd flush with sonic appreciation. Perhaps the focal point of their magnificence was the fact that all the instrumentation was carried out live, including the breakdowns that had psych-rock levels of distortion and fuzz, really gnawing at the audience's urges to move around.

Closing Day 1 was Grouch in Dub, the live act of Oscar Allison's solo project Grouch – an aural experience unlike any other.  Grouch, controlled his band in an almost conductor like fashion, stationed atop a platform, and was accompanied by guitars, violins, trumpets and saxophone/ clarinet player. Grouch handled the rhythm section from his array of controllers and synths while his band dutifully followed, filling up his sonic space with their eclectic musicality. A combination of reggae-style guitars, ambient style strings and breakbeat-esque grooves, Grouch in Dub's set was an incredible manifestation of a melange of genres, with, as expected, dub, at its fore. Distorted, haunting samples marred with glitchy effects dotted the entire performance, adding yet another texture to this music. However, the pinnacle of the set was the introduction of a vocalist (Grouch Princess) who added both an element of stage presence that was slightly lacking, and abrasive vocals that, made the breakdowns and build-ups that much more impactful.

Through the two days, the Anglerfish Stage was packed to the brim with a dedicated set of techno-enthusiasts who stopped for nothing more than a beer from the nearby stall. Secluded in a slightly more forested and shelled off part of the venue, the Anglerfish Stage created an atmosphere very conducive to the music it was hosting. Closed off, cramped in a nervy way and dark created an industrial-like setting in the middle of a forest. The vibe was reminiscent of fabled raves in Himachali forests or on Goa beaches – little track of time, little heed for anything but the music that ebbed and flowed between immaculately mixed transitions and drops. The music ranged from heavy and gritty to other-worldly and ethereal – with the audience equally receptive.

The ambience at this stage was further compounded by the spectacular production. While light and sound design across the venue was faultless, this stage took it to another level. With a slightly elevated DJ booth carved out of a fish's mouth and a perfectly symmetric placement of lights around the stage that shone both white, yellow and even green lasers at times, the stage was responsible for taking the dancers' experience to unparalleled heights. It was reminiscent of the light tech that was seen at Mixtape's Disrupt festival, with narrow strips of lights flashing in perfect synchronisation with the music.

Day 2 opened with Apragamata, which was a melange of a variety of unique, unconventional instruments. Seated on a single chair, Apragatama controlled all aspects of his performance from within the reach of his arms. Be it the melodic bits of the performance, the bass, the percussion or the little textures that were added, Apragatama eased through them all with a smile on his face. It was the perfect way to start the day – organic, natural and warm music to accompany you lying down on the festival grounds.

He also played a set at the Big Tree, a stage situated in the shadow of a mammoth-sized tree whose roots were adorned with mattresses, pillows and a large dosage of fairy lights. What was most novel about this stage was that it was solar powered – something that I have never come across before. Located no more than 20 feet away from the tree itself were the solar panels, that powered a stage that saw the artists within touching distance from the audience, redefining intimate settings at festivals.

Echoes of Earth's proclivity toward organic extended not just to their music, but also to the stalls it hosted. Stalls that usually sell t-shirts, posters and other knick-knacks sold sustainable and organic items. Shirts made by hemp, organic facial lotion and sunscreen and ethically sourced jewellery comprised just a few of the items on offer, with each owner of the stall taking some time out to greet and speak with the customers. My favourite of the items being sold was the organic pet food – made from human grade ingredients.

This was once again a testament to the festivals ethos in creating a safe space for all living beings and was seen with the host of dogs that were seen running around the festival grounds. It was a touching sight to see entire families making their way to the festival – parents, kids, pets and even grandparents! There was a true air of love and security that ran through the festival, be it at the food court where a child was begging his mother to buy him an ice-cream or between stages, where a full-blown cricket match was taking place.

Next on the Mandala Stage was Aditi Ramesh, who has had a meteoric year and a half. Her vocals and keys were accompanied by a rhythm section that displayed almost-telepathic connection with one another, and with Aditi – with bass runs, drum fills and slight vocal inflexions being replicated note-to-note. The introduction of ‘AC' on guitars and a flautist added a fresh, vibrant element to the set that can be condensed to a single word – tight. All artists knew their roles, sections and responsibilities down to a t. This resulted in both a well-disciplined performance, but also one that saw the artists enjoying themselves on stage, grinning at each other, and co-ordinating off-notes, with this infectious energy resonating with the crowd. ACs distorted guitar solos would take the lead, on top Aditi's jazz-style rhythmic keys and a drum and bass section that ran around octaves and beats. Her aggressive vocals flowed between harmonies that transcended vocal styles and norm, yet another example of contemporary fusion music.

On the Lionfish Stage Nothing Anonymous, comprising Nirmit Shah (of Ape Echoes) and vocalist Ambika Nayak, set the tone for the acts that would follow on the stage. Ambient, synth-heavy compositions with droney, ethereal vocals quickly moved into upbeat, bass-heavy sections. One of the highlights of the performance was the poignant, glitch-heavy cover of Daniel Caesar's ‘Best Part'.

Back on the Mandala Stage, Ankur Tewari brought his soul-stirring compositions live with the help of an exquisite band. The intimate, melancholic songwriting that Tewari is well known for radiated with the crowd, who were gushing at the honesty and longing that his voice was filled with. Simple songs with lyrics that obligated the listener to explore the fondest of memories from their past made this performance one that was for the heart. It would be amiss to describe this performance without lauding Sid Coutto's backing vocals. As he has been doing for time immemorial with Zero, Coutto's harmonies provided Tewari with the perfect platform to let his voice take centre stage, filling up all sonic space and adding a much-needed layer, filled with warmth.

Anomalie, on the Lionfish Stage, brought a host of genres and complex arrangements into one set, that oscillated between trip-hop and jazz. These styles of music, often intimidating and awkward in live settings were made accessible and thoroughly enjoyable through the band and its efforts. Featuring two (at times even 3) keyboard players, there was a host of melodies that simultaneously ran through the set, being held together by some skilful drumming. While basslines and pads were no doubt top of the line, the real star of the show was the piano sections. This saw Anomalies hands running across the keyboard, flittering through notes, chords and scales, in the most fluid manner – effortless and energised on all fronts.

When Chai Met Toast – the quintessential festival band brought their sing-alongable, happy go lucky tunes to the Mandala stage. Their set, filled with "oohs and aahs" that were mirrored syllable for syllable by the enraptured crowd, was a life-affirming one. The happiness and comradery seen on stage was contagious and resonated both with the music and with the crowd. Banjos, trumpets, tambourines and acoustic guitars made the perfect recipe for a sundowner, accompanied with a swaying crowd and a light breeze.

All attention then moved back to the Lionfish stage where the mighty Dualist Inquiry debuted his band avatar in Bangalore. Sahej Bakshi of Delhi, took his one-man guitar-synth-mixer set to a much larger scale, incorporating a violin, drums and keys into his performance. These added vibrant elements to the set, making it larger and more expansive yet straying true to Dualist's usual brand of chopped vocals, samples and guitar riffs. The usual droney, reverberated guitars filled with delay and a host of other effects ran amok, however they were accompanied by violin notes that added great depth and texture to the sound. There were times when the transitions between songs felt a little bit awkward and untimely, however, the massive songs that followed more than made up for it.

Co-headlining the festival was Awesome Tapes from Africa, who closed the Mandala stage with, well, awesome tapes from Africa. As self-explanatory as names come, the set was a melting pot of Brian Shimkovitz's travels across the continent of Africa, where he amassed a collection of local sounds, beats and vocals. Shimkovitz was a student in Ghana who became fascinated by the rich musical culture of the region, which then led to him exploring the vicinity, collecting more and more cassette tapes. Filled with beats that had chants in indigenous African languages transported the audience half the world away to a different continent. This journey was rhythmically diverse and was an aural ethnography of a part of the world close to Shimkovitz's heart.

All excitement and chatter at the festival, however, was directed at three letters: FKJ. The French multi-instrumentalist who pioneered live looping was bringing his vast live setup to India for the second time in as many years, which had the general festival-going population abuzz with unfathomable excitement. As he finally took the stage after some technical difficulties, there was a barrage of cell-phones aiming to catch a glimpse of the master at work. Going through his entire repertoire of gleaming songs that blend funky keyboard riffs with catchy basslines and guitar licks, FKJ even had the crowd singing guitar notes before he played them! There was frenzy with people breaking out into uncoordinated, impromptu dances with whoever was standing next to them, and all-round jubilation. This enthusiasm was stoked even further when a firebreather walked right into the centre of the crowd and began to exhale flames that shined in the inebriated eyes of onlookers. It was the fitting end to what had been an incredible festival and a reminder that Echoes of Earth is, and always will be, about the earth and its elements.

All in all, Echoes of Earth pushed the envelope on forward thinking music festivals in India. They were true to their cause in an unprecedented manner. While festivals nowadays claim to be environmentally friendly, it all seems very gimmicky and superficial, however, Echoes of Earth was free from any pretence and their commitment to the surroundings and to the music was top-notch.
